[Music]
very good morning and welcome to
breakfast with dan walker and louise
minchin
the headline is for you at six o'clock
this morning open for business
outdoor hospitality shops and
hairdressers in england will welcome
back customers in the latest stage of
lockdown easing
yes good morning the shutters are coming
up but will the tales be
ringing i'm in chester where retailers
are hoping to recoup millions of pounds
worth of losses the duke of edinburgh
remembered by those
closest to him his children pay tribute
to their father
it's great loss i think the way i would
put it is that
we've lost almost the grandfather of the
nation it's
very very sad but i have to say that the
extraordinary tributes
and the memories that everybody has had
and been willing to share
has been so fantastic
good morning history is made at the
masters hideki matsuyama becomes the
first japanese man to win a golf major
after victory at augusta national oh i
was a dancer
where are you yes dad what
you're an engineer sir anthony hopkins
becomes the oldest ever winner of the
best actor award at the baftas
good morning some of us waking up this
morning to some sleet and snow and as we
go through this week
it's going to be cold that we frost by
night still some wintry showers in the
forecast but equally
some sunshine i love all the details
coming up
[Music]
it's a monday the 12th of april our top
story for you the prime minister has
urged people to behave
responsibly as england takes its next
step in easing lockdown restrictions
from
today pubs and restaurants can now serve
customers outside and all shops gyms and
close contact services like hairdressers
can reopen
some rules have been relaxed in wales
scotland and northern
ireland aruna ayenga has more
opening its doors at midnight regulars
at this huddersfield pub have been
waiting for this moment for months
[Laughter]
what used to be taken for granted now a
luxury to be savoured
drinking can only take place outdoors so
was the chilly weather are put off
it was snowing earlier but i'm still
going to come out
after 14 months of not going anywhere
except funerals um it's a it's a great
plus
we didn't even know if anyone was going
to come it's it's in huddersfield it's
midnight it's freezing cold
and look everyone's come and we're in a
single table that hasn't been that
people haven't arrived at
thousands of businesses are reopening
under the next phase of covered
restriction easing
in england shops can open pubs and
restaurants can serve customers outdoors
hairdressers salons gyms and outdoor
attractions like
zoos and theme parks can now be visited
in wales non-essential shops can reopen
today but it will be a few more weeks
until pubs can do the same
travel restrictions across the border
have been eased and most children are
back in school
and in scotland most children will
return to school unless they're
shielding
some are still closed for easter
holidays in northern ireland all
children are back in school
the stay-at-home message is being
relaxed and up to 10 people from two
households
can meet in a private garden in a
statement prime minister boris johnson
struck a cautious tone
he said i urge everyone to continue to
behave responsibly
and remember hands face space and fresh
air
to suppress covid as we push on with our
vaccination program
but there's no stopping the enthusiasm
of pub landlords as they prepare to pull
the pints
this pub in bexley heath applied for a
temporary license to open at midnight
i think we've come through the woods so
i'm hoping that this is sort of a
rebirth almost and that we're open now
for the foreseeable
the next big date for hospitality will
be may the 17th
when hopefully customers will be able to
enjoy a meal and a drink indoors
aruna aienga bbc news
and breakfast jay mccubbin is at one of
those pubs which will be providing
outdoor hospitality today good morning
to jane i got a few customers behind you
as well
well not customers not just yet in in
about an hour's time this place is gonna
be busy good morning everybody
good morning this is what we're talking
about it's not often
you crave to be in a pub beer garden
when the temperatures are minus three
but i think
a lot of people will be excited about
this today we're at the greyhound inn in
worselow in um
staffordshire bit political i'm told i'm
not allowed to say
derbyshire is that right no let's not go
there
listen this is this is uh landlord lee
good morning to you lee
how enthusiastic are you about today and
what have you got planned uh we've been
enthusiastic since march last year but
uh
so we've got a welcome breakfast for
some of the guests who have
helped us and supporters over last year
some of the business sort of partners
who have also
collaborated with us um first thing and
then
later on uh open at 12 o'clock and the
community have really kept you going
here haven't they how grateful are you
today
i'm hugely grateful so thank you very
much to everybody who supported us
meals and your own pints that you've
been brewing
absolutely everything literally anything
we could do to support the problem and
support the community
we have done gonna be exciting this
morning thanks for chatting to us look
at this they've even got a toast master
here this morning good morning to you
very good morning
you're gonna you're gonna be here to
welcome guests in about an hour's time
aren't you for breakfast certainly um
excellent stuff listen there are
actually 60
of pubs can't open today because they
don't have the beautiful outdoor
facilities as they do here so
it's just the first tentative steps
isn't it towards getting back to normal
but
lots of enthusiasm here this morning and
we're slow back to you
thank you jane very important step that
we'll see you later on we'll be talking
through all the changes this morning
let's get some more detail on how
changes to restrictions
in wales what happens there today thomas
morgan is in cardiff for us so just
take us through because it's not quite
the same as what's happening in england
is it
no it's not so this be a garden um in
cardiff and
all of those across wales won't be
opening here until at least
the 26th of this month and then we
haven't got a date yet for
indoors opening but what will be opening
is the rest of the high street and close
contact services they all
reopen from today hairdressers have
actually thankfully been open in wales
since the middle of march much to my
delight and many of my colleagues
but the other thing is happening today
is that travel will now be allowed
between
wales and england which is a huge boost
for self-catering and
accommodation outlets across the country
because many places i've spoken to
actually rely up to 70 80 percent on
tourists coming in
from england so some have chosen to stay
closed until today
one of which we'll be going to a little
later in the program
as well as that schools are open today
all face-to-face
education but another disgruntled
industry in wales today will be gyms
looking endlessly
across the border as they reopen and
welcome fitness enthusiasts
there thomas thank you very much indeed
we'll see a little bit later thank you
now the prime minister will lead
tributes to the duke of edinburgh in the
commons later as parliament is recalled
a day early from its easter break
the princess royal said her father had
left a legacy which can inspire us
all and the duke of york said the queen
had described prince philip's death as
having left
a huge void in her life our royal
correspondent daniella ralph has this
report
it'll be a week of reflection here in
windsor as the town prepares for the
duke of edinburgh's funeral
over the weekend his children attended
church in windsor great park
and spoke personally of their grief and
loss
it's very very sad but i have to say
that the
extraordinary tributes and the memories
that everybody has had and
been willing to share has been so
fantastic
and it just goes to show he he might
have been
our father grandfather father-in-law but
but
he meant so much to so many other people
it's so lovely for so many people
to learn about what he did
because i think it's i think quite a lot
of things that have come out
would have surprised some people the
countess also spoke to estate staff who
knew the duke
she told them his death had been very
peaceful she said it was as if someone
had taken him by the hand
and off he went princess anne paid her
own tribute releasing this photo of her
and her father at the london olympics in
of his death she said you know it's
going to happen but you're never really
ready
we will miss him but he leaves a legacy
which can inspire us all
the family focus is now on protecting
and supporting the queen
as she mourns her son prince andrew said
after 73 years of marriage
she felt there was now a huge void in
her life
daniela ralph bbc news windsor
well daniela is live for us in windsor
this morning good morning to you so
what can we expect danielle over the
next few days in the build up to that
funeral on saturday
yes good morning dan well in the next
few days we will hear more details about
the funeral service
itself and of course of those people who
will be attending in that group of 30
that are allowed
now there are reports this morning
several reports that prince harry
the duke of sussex is now back in the uk
people saying that they saw him at
heathrow airport yesterday afternoon
after flying in on a flight from
california
his team will not confirm that he is
back in the uk but to be honest
if he is going to abide by the uk's
self-isolation regulations then he would
really need to be back here by now
in order to be able to safely attend his
grandfather's funeral
on saturday afternoon it is also going
to be a day of political tribute um
parliament has been recalled a day early
in the tributes there will be led by the
prime minister
boris johnson followed by a response by
the labour leader kier starmer
the scottish parliament has also been
recalled and we'll hear tributes from
politicians in wales as well and i think
the thing to remember with these
political tributes is
many of these politicians will have met
the duke of edinburgh over the years at
various functions and events and i
expect a lot of the political tributes
that we'll hear
will be personal anecdotes and stories
and memories from those who've met him
including of course condolences and
sympathy being offered to the queen
daniela thank you very much for that i'm
sure we'll be speaking to you over the
next few days as well as daniela ralph
outside windsor castle this morning in
other news the former prime minister
david cameron has said he has
important lessons to learn over his
lobbying work on behalf
of a financial firm which has since
collapsed
this follows weeks of criticism that he
contacted ministers
about green silk capital mr cameron did
not break any rules but says he accepts
he should have gone through
only the most formal of channels that
was his quote the labour party says many
serious questions remain
unanswered officials in saint vincent
have said the caribbean island looks
like a battle zone after a series of
volcanic eruptions
a volcano called la souffle first
erupted on friday
blanketing the area with ash as you can
see
and forcing around 16 000 people to
leave their homes
seismologists have warned there are
further eruptions likely
in the coming days
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news